docs: v3 spec (#629)
enix/kube-image-keeper: docs/v3/spec.md

# spec v3

## ImageAlternative

```yaml
kind: ImageAlternative
metadata:
  name: acme-foo
spec:
  # Generic Kubernetes labels selector field to restrict pods where this CR apply
  # https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/latest/#labelselector-v1-meta
  # Empty/Nothing match all pod
  podSelector: {}
  namespaceSelector: {}

  # Image rewrite policy used in mutating webhook
  #   OnFailure: Default. Keep using original image if available, else use first available
  #             image in `alternatives` list
  #   Always: Always rewrite image to first available in `alternatives` list
  #          (bypass quota, latency, network cost, …)
  rewritePolicy: OnFailure    # OnFailure | Always

  # Ordered list of equivalent image prefix that could be used if one is unavailable
  alternatives:
  - quay.io/acme/foo
  - docker.io/acme-org/foo
  - 123456.dkr.ecr.eu-west-3.amazonaws.com/repo/acme/foo

>   - registry.local:5000/mirror/acme/foo

Author: What if I use the prefix `quay.io/acme/foo:`? All other alternatives should end with `:` too? Probably yes. Then maybe we can have 3 kinds of prefixes: `:` ended, `/` ended and others. For instance:

---

```yaml
alternatives:
  - "quay.io/acme/foo:"
  - "docker.io/acme-org/foo:"
```

Will produce:

- `quay.io/acme/foo:latest`  <=> `docker.io/acme-org/foo:latest`
- `quay.io/acme/foo-bar:latest` doesn't match
- `quay.io/acme/foo/bar:latest`  doesn't match

---

```yaml
alternatives:
  - quay.io/acme/foo/
  - docker.io/acme-org/foo/
```

Will produce:

- `quay.io/acme/foo:latest` doesn't match
- `quay.io/acme/foo-bar:latest` <=> doesn't match
- `quay.io/acme/foo/bar:latest` <=> `docker.io/acme-org/foo/bar:latest`

---

```yaml
alternatives:
  - quay.io/acme/foo
  - docker.io/acme-org/foo
```

Will produce:

- `quay.io/acme/foo:latest` <=> `docker.io/acme-org/foo:latest`
- `quay.io/acme/foo-bar:latest` <=> `docker.io/acme-org/foo-bar:latest`
- `quay.io/acme/foo/bar:latest` <=> `docker.io/acme-org/foo/bar:latest`

---

```yaml
alternatives:
  - "quay.io/acme/foo:"
  - docker.io/acme-org/foo/
```

Should be considered invalid as well as

```yaml
alternatives:
  - "quay.io/acme/foo:"
  - docker.io/acme-org/foo
```

and

```yaml
alternatives:
  - quay.io/acme/foo
  - docker.io/acme-org/foo/
```

Also, what happens when two `ImageAlternative` have overlapping alternatives? The most specific one (longest-prefix) should win I guess? Should be documented.

Reviewer: For me, we should keep image prefix logic pretty simple and not introduce globing behavior whithout glob marker.
It should be either a specific image or a subpath with a significant trailing slash (like for rsync with directories), nothing more. And we can't mix specific images and subpath.
This way we keep this readable and avoid any possible image mismatch in alternatives due to an overlaping prefix in two different images name.

We may need to decide matched depth with subpath, should it match only 1 level (only image directly under this path) or multiples ones. I'm personnally in favor of only 1 level.

So from your examples:

```yaml
alternatives:
  - "quay.io/acme/foo:"
  - "docker.io/acme-org/foo:"
```

Will be invalid (trailing `:`)

```yaml
alternatives:
  - quay.io/acme/foo/
  - docker.io/acme-org/foo/
```

Will produce:

- `quay.io/acme/foo:latest` doesn't match
- `quay.io/acme/foo-bar:latest` doesn't match
- `quay.io/acme/foo/bar:latest` <=> `docker.io/acme-org/foo/bar:latest`
- `quay.io/acme/foo/bar/oni:latest` doesn't match

```yaml
alternatives:
  - quay.io/acme/foo
  - docker.io/acme-org/foo
```

Will produce:

- `quay.io/acme/foo:latest` <=> `docker.io/acme-org/foo:latest`
- `quay.io/acme/foo-bar:latest` doesn't match
- `quay.io/acme/foo/bar:latest` doesn't match
- `quay.io/acme/foo/bar/oni:latest` doesn't match

  # https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/latest/#labelselector-v1-meta
  # Empty/Nothing match all pod
  podSelector: {}
  namespaceSelector: {}

  # Image rewrite policy used in mutating webhook
  #   OnFailure: Default. Keep using original image if available, else use the mirrored
  #             image in `destination`
  #   Always: Always rewrite image to the mirrored image in `destination`
  #          (bypass quota, latency, network cost, …)
  #   None: Only copy image to mirror, don't use it as an image alternative (archiving, compliance, security scan, …)
  rewritePolicy: OnFailure    # OnFailure (default) | Always | None

  destination:
    path: registry.tld/mirror/
    insecure: false            # Default: false - Allow HTTP registry
    push:                      # Credentials for controller to push images and delete unused tags
      auth:
        secretRef:
          name: mirror-write-credentials
    pull:                      # Credentials to pull image that will be synced in namespaces
      auth:                    # with rewritten image to use destination registry
        secretRef:

>           name: mirror-read-credentials

Author: There is no `injectPullSecret` here as we have in `ImageAlternative`. Does it means it is always on? Should we make it configurable too?

Reviewer: It's a mistake. `auth` field should be the same for `ImageAlternative` and `ImageMirror` `pull`.

# spec v3

## ImageAlternative

```yaml
kind: ImageAlternative
metadata:
  name: acme-foo
spec:
  # Generic Kubernetes labels selector field to restrict pods where this CR apply
  # https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/latest/#labelselector-v1-meta
  # Empty/Nothing match all pod
  podSelector: {}
  namespaceSelector: {}

  # Image rewrite policy used in mutating webhook
  #   OnFailure: Default. Keep using original image if available, else use first available
  #             image in `alternatives` list
  #   Always: Always rewrite image to first available in `alternatives` list
  #          (bypass quota, latency, network cost, …)

>   rewritePolicy: OnFailure    # OnFailure | Always

Reviewer 2: Oh, btw - I remember why I had settled for `PreferFirst` and `PreferOriginal`!

Imagine that we have a Pod using `nginx`, and a CR specifying the following alternatives:
```
- registry.tld/nginx
- docker.io/library/nginx
```

`rewritePolicy: Always` seems to imply that we *always* rewrite the image. But if `registry.tld` is down, we'll still keep the original Docker Hub image.

Reviewer 3: to be reviewed later

Author: What about this?

```yaml
evaluationOrder: PreserveOrder | PreferOriginal
```

`PreserveOrder` could also be named `Default`, `Sequential`, `AsDefined`, `IndexBased` to prevent the "order" repetition.

Another option:

```yaml
evaluationOrder: PrimaryFirst | OriginalFirst
```

Reviewer: We decided to keep `rewritePolicy: OnFailure | Always` for now.

  # Ordered list of equivalent image prefix that could be used if one is unavailable

>   alternatives:

Reviewer 2: After sleeping on it, there are two things that give me pause:
- the `alternatives` list, while simple, doesn't give a hint that we're talking about image *prefixes*
- splitting the configuration in an object, keyed with the image prefixes, feels rather weird - I can't think of any other place in the Kubernetes API where that happens

Would it make sense to switch back to something like:
```
alternatives:
- imagePrefix: docker.io/acme-org/foo
  # everything below is optional
  auth: ...
  insecure: ...
  unavailable: ...
```

`imagePrefix` makes it clear that we're talking about a prefix. (And if in the future there is a huge demand for glob/regex, we can add `imageGlob` or `imageRegex` in a backward-compatible way.)

... I realize this is close to Aurélien's previous proposal; like Alex said earlier, we shouldn't be afraid to go full cycle (©JCVD😂)

Reviewer 3: agreed during our weekly meeting

                                   # to pull from provider registry without additional secret
    "registry.local:5000/mirror/acme/foo":
      insecure: true               # HTTP registry
      unavailable: true            # Image no longer available in this repository but if a pod
                                   # use this image, we'll try to substitute an alternative
      auth:                        # credentials to pull images from the registry
        secretRef:
          name: local-registry
          injectPullSecret: true   # Default: true (for secretRef)
                                   # inject secret in pod namespace if this image is used as alternative
                                   # so kubelet could pull the image from the registry
```

## ImageMirror

```yaml
kind: ImageMirror
metadata:
  name: prod-mirror
spec:
  # Generic Kubernetes labels selector field to restrict pods where this CR apply
  # https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/latest/#labelselector-v1-meta
  # Empty/Nothing match all pod
  podSelector: {}
  namespaceSelector: {}
  # List of image prefix to explicitly exclude from mirroring (e.g. huge images)

>   imageExclude: []

Reviewer 2: Maybe `excludeImagePrefixes` ?

Reviewer 3: agreed during our weekly meeting

Author: Done in 46c7349: renamed to `excludeImages`, entries are globs as decided in meeting.

  rewritePolicy: OnFailure    # OnFailure (default) | Always | None

  destination:
    path: registry.tld/mirror/
    insecure: false            # Default: false - Allow HTTP registry
    push:                      # Credentials for controller to push images and delete unused tags
      auth:
        secretRef:
          name: mirror-write-credentials
    pull:                      # Credentials to pull image that will be synced in namespaces
      auth:                    # with rewritten image to use destination registry
        secretRef:
          name: mirror-read-credentials

  cleanup:
    enabled: true              # Default: true - Delete image tag no longer referenced by any pod
    retention: 24h             # Image tag hold duration before deleting them, to deal with cronjob for instance

  # Detect and reconcile image tag drift (digest change), e.g. tag `latest`
  #   Ignore: Image is copied once on destination registry and not updated if upstream tag digest change
  #   Warn: Periodically check if tag digest is still the same and warn if different
  #   Sync: Periodically check if tag digest is still the same and resync image in destination if different

>   driftPolicy: Ignore          # Ignore (default) | Warn | Sync

Reviewer 2: If we want kuik to be as transparent as possible, perhaps the default should be `Sync`? 🤔 

(Otherwise, when the primary fails, we could unexpectedly switch to an older image.)

Reviewer 3: We could add an `Auto` flag which triggers Sync when `pullPolicy` is `Always`.
But we know that `Always` might trigger complicated behavior within Kuik.
To be reviewed post v3.0

Author: Moved in https://github.com/enix/kube-image-keeper/blob/spec/v3/docs/v3/open-questions.md

  # Multi-arch support
  #   Auto: Copy images for arch retrieved from node labels
  #   All: Copy all arch referenced for an image
  #   List: Explicit list of arch we need to copy images
  platforms:
    mode: Auto                 # Auto (default) | All | List
    #list: []                  # Only used with `mode: List`
```

## ImageMonitor

```yaml
kind: ImageMonitor
metadata:
  name: cluster-images
spec:
  # Generic Kubernetes labels selector field to restrict pods where this CR apply
  # https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/latest/#labelselector-v1-meta
  # Empty/Nothing match all pod
  podSelector: {}
  namespaceSelector: {}

  unusedImageExpiry: 24h       # keep monitoring for a given time after no longer used in cluster
                               # useful for cronjob

>   driftDetection:

Reviewer 2: Why not `driftDetection: true`? 

(Esepcially as just below, we have `monitorAlternatives: (bool)`)

Reviewer 3: agreed during our weekly meeting

    enabled: true              # Default: true - Detect if an image tag digest differ from pod running in cluster

  monitorAlternatives: false   # Default: false - Also monitor alternatives images instead of only original ones

```

## Annotations

Annotations added to pod by mutating webhook:

```yaml
metadata:

>   annotations:

Reviewer 2: In the annotations, what does the key (`"config-reloader"` in the examples below) correspond to?

If it's the name of the container, how do we handle initContainers, ephemeralContainers, and image volumes?

Reviewer: It's the container name. I had the same question and spec say the container name must be unique:
> Each container in a pod must have a unique name

> The name for an init container or normal container must be unique among all containers.

> Name of the ephemeral container specified as a DNS_LABEL. This name must be unique among all containers, init containers and ephemeral containers.

From https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/core/pod-v1/

So I assumed it was ok. Furthermore, we already use the container name in KuiK v2 annotations.

        serviceAccountRef:
          name: kuik-ecr-access
      injectPullSecret: false      # Default: false (for provider) - kubelet already have permission
                                   # to pull from provider registry without additional secret
  - imagePrefix: "registry.local:5000/mirror/acme/foo"
    insecure: true                 # HTTP registry
    unavailable: true              # Image no longer available in this repository but if a pod
                                   # use this image, we'll try to substitute an alternative
    auth:                          # credentials to pull images from the registry
      secretRef:
        name: local-registry
      injectPullSecret: true       # Default: true (for secretRef)
                                   # inject secret in pod namespace if this image is used as alternative
                                   # so kubelet could pull the image from the registry
```

### Alternatives matching

The `imagePrefix` of an entry is **not** a glob: there is no implicit wildcard, and no glob
marker is supported. It is either a **single image** or a **subpath**, and the form is given

> by the trailing character:

Author: Maybe we should rename `imagePrefix` as `imagePath`, since only full segments are allowed (eg. `quay.io/acme/foo` should not match `quay.io/acme/foo-bar`).

  injectPullSecret: false   # Default: false (for provider)
```

### Secrets resolve in a single namespace

`secretRef` carries **no namespace**: it always resolves in kuik's install namespace (the *cluster
resource namespace*, configurable by an operator flag), exactly as cert-manager resolves a
`ClusterIssuer`'s secrets through `--cluster-resource-namespace`. Two reasons, the first decisive:

- **it closes a confused deputy hole.** The kinds are cluster-scoped, so with a free namespace anyone
  able to create one could name another team's secret (`namespace: team-b`) with
  `injectPullSecret: true` and have kuik copy it into a namespace they control — kuik would be a
  secret exfiltration channel. Resolving in one namespace means referencing a secret requires being
  able to write it in `kuik-system`, which closes the trust loop
- **uniform read RBAC**: every component needs only a `Role` in `kuik-system`, and nothing anywhere
  needs a cluster-wide `get secrets`

### `provider`

The enum is **closed** (`aws`, `gcp`, `azure`), with deliberately no `exec:` credential helper:
running arbitrary binaries from a minimal image is a security surface kuik does not want. Region and

> project are derived from the registry hostname.

Reviewer: Remove the exec credential helper as not useful here. Important information here is it's a fixed list of supported cloud-provider registries (which come with they're own auth method usually).

`serviceAccountRef` is optional and requests a token for that ServiceAccount, so a CR can carry its
own IAM role instead of borrowing the controller's global identity.

### `injectPullSecret`

Whether kuik copies a pull secret into the pod namespace, so the kubelet can pull the image this
`auth` protects. The defaults are asymmetric on purpose:

| `auth` form | Default | Why |
| ----------- | ------- | --- |
| `secretRef` | `true` | with a static secret, if the controller needs it to check the image then the kubelet needs it to pull |
| `provider` | `false` | the majority case is same-cloud, where the kubelet is already authorized natively |

Set to `true` with a `provider`, kuik materializes, **renews** and injects a docker-registry secret —

> the cross-cloud case, and what makes 12h ECR tokens usable.

Reviewer: Be more generic:

```suggestion
the cross-cloud case, and what makes cloud-provider registries short lived tokens usable.
```

> [!WARNING]
> A private image with neither `auth` nor a matching
> [`perPrefixFallbackAuth`](#global-config) therefore looks perpetually unavailable, even though the
> kubelet can pull it. A persistent anonymous 401/403 raises a `Warning` event pointing at that
> likely oversight.

## Candidate ordering

An image may be covered by several `ImageAlternative` **and** by one or more `ImageMirror`;
`ImageMonitor` never contributes a candidate. v2 ordered them with a signed `spec.priority` plus a
kind order (Original, CISM, ISM, CRIS, RIS). v3 has no `priority` and merges every match into one
list:

> **`Always` `ImageMirror`** → **`Always` `ImageAlternative`** → **original image** →
> **`OnFailure` `ImageAlternative`** → **`OnFailure` `ImageMirror`**, CRs sorted by name within each
> band

- the original appears **exactly once, at the pivot**, whatever its declared position in an
  `alternatives` list; a CR's other entries go to that CR's band in declared order. So `Always` on an
  `ImageAlternative` is never a no-op
- an `ImageMirror` contributes **one** candidate, `destination.path` joined with the full original

>   reference (`registry.example.com/mirror/` + `docker.io/library/nginx:1.27`), and none at all under

Reviewer: Contributed candidate is a bit more complicated than a simple join (to handle multi-cluster and digest properly), so perhaps don't add details here as it will be explained elsewhere

Author: Meeting notes: don't tell how to construct the candidate name, it is described somewhere else.

  `rewritePolicy: None` or for an image matching its `excludeImagePrefixes`
- candidates are **deduplicated on (reference, resolved config), keeping the first occurrence**
- sorting by name, not by `creationTimestamp` (the tie-break Gateway API uses): a timestamp is not
  stable under GitOps, where deleting and recreating an object silently changes precedence, and

>   `kubectl get imagealternatives` displays the name order for free

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- sorting CR by name to handle possible overlapping config with deterministic alternatives order
```

> rule above (it answers "would this CR apply?", useful for reviewing a selector before it ever
> wins), or it is redefined as "pods this CR owns". The other gauges are unaffected either way.

## Annotations

Annotations added to pod by mutating webhook:

```yaml
metadata:
  annotations:
    # Same as KuiK v2, keep original images name referenced when we rewrite pod spec
    kuik.enix.io/original-images: |
      {"config-reloader":"quay.io/prometheus-operator/prometheus-config-reloader:v0.91.0","prometheus":"quay.io/prometheus/prometheus:v3.13.1-distroless","thanos-sidecar":"quay.io/thanos/thanos:v0.42.2"}'
    # CR that rewritten the image
    kuik.enix.io/rewritten-by: |
      {"config-reloader":"ImageMirror/prod-mirror","prometheus":"ImageAlternative/prometheus","thanos":"ImageAlternative/thanos"}
    # Reason of KuiK action (image rewrite) or inaction if original image isn't available
    #   OnFailure: Original image wasn't available, rewritten to first available alternative
    #   Always: Rewrite to first available alternative requested by rewritePolicy
    #   NoAlternatives: Could not find an available alternative for the image
    kuik.enix.io/reason:

>       {"config-reloader":"NoAlternatives","prometheus":"Always","thanos":"OnFailure"}

Author: Given that when no available alternatives are found, there could be multiple CR involved in trying to find one and that in this case the image is not rewritten, the `kuik.enix.io/rewritten-by` field should not be populated. The `kuik.enix.io/reason` field would then have no reason to be populated as well, so to keep track of the fact that the image found no alternative, we could add a `kuik.enix.io/no-alternatives` annotation like so:

```yaml
# removes config-reloader from kuik.enix.io/original-images, kuik.enix.io/rewritten-by
# and kuik.enix.io/reason and keep it only in kuik.enix.io/no-alternatives
metadata:
  annotations:
    kuik.enix.io/original-images: |
      {"prometheus":"quay.io/prometheus/prometheus:v3.13.1-distroless","thanos":"quay.io/thanos/thanos:v0.42.2"}'
    kuik.enix.io/rewritten-by: |
      {"prometheus":"ImageAlternative/prometheus","thanos":"ImageAlternative/thanos"}
    kuik.enix.io/reason:
      {"prometheus":"Always","thanos":"OnFailure"}
    kuik.enix.io/no-alternatives: |
      ["config-reloader"]
```

    enabled: true              # Default: true - Delete image tag no longer referenced by any pod
    retention: 24h             # Image tag hold duration before deleting them, to deal with cronjob for instance

  # Detect and reconcile image tag drift (digest change), e.g. tag `latest`
  #   Ignore: Image is copied once on destination registry and not updated if upstream tag digest change
  #   Warn: Periodically check if tag digest is still the same and warn if different
  #   Sync: Periodically check if tag digest is still the same and resync image in destination if different
  driftPolicy: Ignore          # Ignore (default) | Warn | Sync

  # Multi-arch support
  #   Auto: Copy images for arch retrieved from node labels
  #   All: Copy all arch referenced for an image
  #   List: Explicit list of arch we need to copy images
  # Ignored (treated as `All`) for digest-pinned images, see "Digest-pinned images"
  platforms:
    mode: Auto                 # Auto (default) | All | List
    #list: []                  # Only used with `mode: List`
```

### Mirror loop prevention

A mirror never mirrors itself, and never mirrors another mirror: the `destination.path` of **every**

> `ImageMirror` in the cluster is implicitly excluded from **every** `ImageMirror`, on top of each

Reviewer: Technically we should only exclude current ImageMirror path. As we always use original image, there is no way we create a mirror loop between two ImageMirror.

The only case where it could happen, is if user explicitly use an image from a mirror as origin image. This is not supported as this may confuse KuiK mirror management and there is no good reason to do this.
But even in this unsupported case, it seem ok to mirror the origin image, it won't create a loop either as we only mirror origin image.
If we use a image or mirror B as origin image, mirror A will copy it, but mirror B won't loop copy as it will only use origin (which will be excluded because it exclude self).

Author: Done in 7a05615: a mirror now excludes only its own `destination.path`, with the rationale (every mirror copies the origin, so no loop between mirrors; referencing another mirror's output is unsupported but terminates).

  produced and `B` copies what `A` produced, each copy handing the other a new, deeper reference to
  copy. Two mirrors are enough to fill both registries

Consequences worth stating:

- **cascading mirrors are not supported.** A deliberate "upstream → mirror A → mirror B" chain is
  indistinguishable from the loop above
- creating a mirror is retroactive: images another mirror had already copied below the new
  `destination.path` become excluded, hence no longer desired, and that other mirror's `cleanup` GC
  removes them after its `retention`
  mirror copies, never where it is allowed to write

### Multi-cluster: shared destination, one tag per cluster

Several clusters mirroring to one registry want two things that pull in opposite directions: they
want to **share bytes** (the first cluster pays the transfer, the others do not), and they want to
stay **autonomous** (whatever one cluster deletes, the others keep running). Giving each cluster its
own `destination.path` buys autonomy and loses sharing; sharing the *tag* as well as the path loses
autonomy, because cluster A's `cleanup` then deletes a tag cluster B is actively routing to.

> v3 keeps both by sharing the repository and splitting the tag. Every cluster writes to the same

Reviewer: Perhaps mention why we use this design with cluster identity in tag.

It's to save bandwidth when pushing image, because if we used different "path" (repository in OCI distribution spec) for different cluster, storage will probably be deduplicated by the registry, but it will require each cluster to push it's image. While sharing the same repository, we only need to create a new tag if the image digest is already present, without pushing image layers.

In addition, this also permit to reuse the same ImageMirror manifest between our clusters.

Author: Done in bb43820: the section now states what sharing the repository buys (per-cluster paths would deduplicate storage but each cluster would still upload every layer; sharing makes the second cluster's copy a single tag PUT) and that the ImageMirror object stays identical on every cluster.

also why a shared canonical tag could not work: with `platforms.mode: Auto`, A's index legitimately
lacks the `arm64` B needs, and one tag cannot hold both.

**Each cluster owns its tags and nothing else.** It creates them, verifies them (its loop `HEAD`s
*its* tags and re-`PUT`s any that went missing, again with no blob transfer) and deletes them. There
is no shared mutable state, so no cross-cluster race and no coordination protocol. A cluster that
dies blocks nothing: its tags keep its manifests alive without stopping anyone else from managing
theirs, which is a retention choice rather than a deadlock.

**Cleanup filters on the suffix before diffing.** For each repository of `status.repositories`, the
GC lists `GET /v2/<repo>/tags/list` (a read on that repository alone, never `_catalog`), **keeps only
the tags ending in `_<clusterID>`**, and diffs that against its desired state. Other clusters' tags
are invisible to the diff, so they cannot be deleted by accident. A repository leaves the inventory
when it holds no more tags *of this cluster*, which makes the inventory a local view: it can stay
listed on A while B has already emptied it.

> **Reclaiming space is delegated to the registry.** As long as any cluster tag points at a manifest,

Author: > **Reclaiming space is delegated to the registry.** […] the registry's native untagged GC (distribution, Harbor's "delete untagged") reclaims the space.

This assumption doesn't hold by default on most registries, so as written the multi-cluster cleanup leaks storage on the most common setups.

The OCI distribution-spec leaves garbage collection entirely out of scope (content management is optional; deleting a tag only removes the reference, and nothing in the spec requires the registry to ever collect the now-untagged manifest). What registries actually do:

| Registry | Untagged manifest GC |
| --- | --- |
| CNCF distribution (registry:2/3) | never automatic — offline, stop-the-world `registry garbage-collect --delete-untagged`, run manually |
| Google Artifact Registry | only via a user-configured cleanup policy (`tagState: UNTAGGED`) |
| ECR | only via a user-configured lifecycle policy |
| ACR | only via an opt-in retention policy |
| Harbor | scheduled GC job, "delete untagged artifacts" **unchecked by default** |
| GitLab (metadata DB), Quay | automatic (24h / time-machine window) |

So "the registry reclaims the space" is only true out of the box on GitLab and Quay. Everywhere else, either the user configures registry-side GC, or untagged manifests (and their blobs) accumulate forever.

Related data point from #636: the v2 approach (blind digest delete after resolving the tag) is the opposite failure mode. GAR refuses `DELETE /v2/<repo>/manifests/<digest>` while any tag still references it (`GOOGLE_MANIFEST_DANGLING_TAG`), and registries that *do* accept it cascade-delete **all** tags of the manifest — which in the shared-repository design would nuke the other clusters' `_<clusterID>` tags. So neither "tags only" nor "digest always" is right.

Two ways to fix the spec:

1. **Keep the delegation, document it loudly.** State that on distribution/GAR/ECR/ACR/Harbor the operator must enable the registry's untagged-cleanup mechanism, and list them. Cheap, but "install kuik, storage grows unbounded" is a bad default experience.
2. **Add a best-effort last-tag-standing delete.** After a cluster removes its own tag, if `GET /v2/<repo>/tags/list` shows no remaining tag pointing at the manifest, delete it by digest; treat `GOOGLE_MANIFEST_DANGLING_TAG`-style refusals as "still referenced", not as errors to retry. There is a TOCTOU race (cluster B re-tags between A's list and A's delete), but the worst case is a manifest going 404 for B, and the existing re-mirror-on-`NotFound` path already heals that with a cheap re-push (blobs still exist until the registry's own blob GC runs). GAR even closes the race server-side.

Option 2 keeps "no cross-cluster refcount, no coordination protocol" — the tags/list read *is* the refcount, owned by whoever happens to delete last. I personally prefer the 2nd option.

Reviewer: We don't want to implement alternative complicated cleanup (at least for now), we delegate this entirely to the registry.
So we should document 2 things required to enable ImageMirror cleanup:
* support DELETE on tags
* have a GC that could delete untagged artifacts

In addition, support for tags deletion could be verified on runtime and used to set CR Ready or NotReady with a reason, when the cleanup is enabled.
